thesis/chapters/01_introduction.md, before:

# Chapter 1: Introduction

## 1.1 Background and Context

Artificial intelligence (AI) has evolved from a specialist capability to a foundational driver of enterprise transformation. Between 2023 and 2025, organizations accelerated AI integration across functions and geographies, fueled by advances in large language models, cloud-based ecosystems, and rapid democratization through enterprise platforms such as Microsoft 365 Copilot and ChatGPT Enterprise.

According to McKinsey's *State of AI* series, AI adoption has accelerated dramatically: after hovering around 50 percent for years, adoption jumped to 72 percent in 2024 and reached 88 percent by late 2025 [@mckinseyStateAI2024; @mckinseyStateAI2025]. This growth represents a fundamental shift in how organizations approach technology. AI is no longer an experimental capability but an expected component of modern work.

Yet this growth in adoption has not translated proportionally into business impact. Boston Consulting Group reported that only 5 percent of companies achieve measurable business value from AI initiatives, while roughly 74 percent struggle to scale beyond proofs of concept [@bcgAIAdoption2024; @bcgAIAdoption2025]. McKinsey found that only about 6 percent of organizations qualify as "AI high performers," that is, those attributing meaningful EBIT impact to AI and reporting significant value, while most organizations remain in piloting rather than scaling phases [@mckinseyStateAI2025]. IBM's Global AI Adoption Index found that 37 percent of enterprises cite data complexity and quality as their top barrier to AI success [@ibm2023], while Capgemini research suggests that organizations embedding AI into redesigned workflows achieve substantially higher returns than those merely layering AI atop legacy processes [@capgemini2025].

These figures reveal a paradox: AI is nearly ubiquitous, yet most enterprises fail to realize sustained economic or operational returns. MIT Media Lab's NANDA initiative estimates that 90 to 95 percent of generative-AI pilots fail to scale or yield measurable profit-and-loss improvements [@mitMediaLab2025]. This persistent gap between adoption rates and value realization (termed the "adoption-value gap") represents both a significant business challenge and a research opportunity.

Understanding why individuals adopt or resist AI tools is essential for closing this gap. While organizational-level barriers such as data infrastructure, governance frameworks, and change management have received considerable attention in practitioner literature, individual-level adoption psychology remains underexplored in empirical research. Technology acceptance research offers theoretical frameworks for understanding these individual differences, yet existing instruments were developed for earlier technology generations and may not capture the unique characteristics of AI tools.

## 1.2 Statement of the Problem

Despite decades of technology acceptance research, organizations lack validated instruments for assessing individual-level AI adoption readiness. This gap creates three interconnected problems:

**Theoretical Gap**: The dominant technology acceptance framework, the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology 2 (UTAUT2), was developed and validated primarily on mobile and consumer technologies [@venkatesh2012consumer]. While UTAUT2 explains significant variance in technology adoption generally, AI tools present unique characteristics that may require theoretical extension. These include concerns about job displacement, questions of algorithmic transparency, and trust in autonomous decision-making systems. Venkatesh [-@venkatesh2021adoption] identified nine unique research challenges for AI adoption that existing frameworks do not fully address, calling for empirical investigation of AI-specific adoption factors.

**Measurement Gap**: Current AI adoption assessments in organizational practice rely largely on ad hoc surveys or general technology readiness measures. No psychometrically validated instrument exists specifically for measuring AI adoption readiness in professional and academic contexts. This measurement gap limits both research comparability and practical diagnostic utility.

**Practice Gap**: Organizations invest heavily in AI infrastructure and training but often lack the diagnostic tools to identify which employees are likely to adopt AI tools, which will resist, and why. Without valid measurement instruments, intervention strategies remain poorly targeted. The 90–95 percent pilot failure rate suggests that technology deployment without attention to individual adoption psychology produces limited returns [@mitMediaLab2025]. Industry research identifies skill gaps and governance challenges as primary barriers: Deloitte's State of Generative AI reports highlight insufficient AI expertise as a significant constraint [@deloitte2024genai], while Gartner identifies governance maturity as a primary differentiator between AI leaders and laggards [@gartner2025].

## 1.3 Purpose of the Study

The purpose of this study is to develop and validate the **AI Readiness Scale (AIRS)**: a psychometrically sound diagnostic instrument extending UTAUT2 for enterprise AI tool adoption. The AIRS serves dual purposes: as a research scale for investigating AI adoption phenomena and as a diagnostic tool enabling organizations to identify specific adoption barriers and design targeted interventions. Specifically, this research aims to:

1. **Develop** a theoretically grounded diagnostic instrument incorporating both established UTAUT2 constructs and AI-specific factors, particularly AI Trust, enabling identification of specific adoption barriers.

2. **Validate** the instrument through rigorous split-sample methodology, using exploratory factor analysis (EFA) on a development sample and confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) on an independent holdout sample.

3. **Test** structural relationships between adoption predictors and behavioral intention through structural equation modeling (SEM).

4. **Examine** measurement invariance across student and professional populations to establish the instrument's applicability across diverse workforce contexts.

5. **Identify** moderating factors (including professional experience and AI usage frequency) that influence adoption pathways.

6. **Establish** a validated psychometric foundation for future research and organizational applications.

## 1.4 Research Questions and Hypotheses

### 1.4.1 Research Questions

**Primary Research Question:**
How can UTAUT2 be extended with AI-specific constructs to better predict behavioral intention to adopt AI tools in professional and academic contexts?

**Secondary Research Questions:**

1. What is the factor structure of an AI-specific adoption readiness instrument?
2. Does the instrument demonstrate measurement invariance across student and professional populations?
3. Which factors most strongly predict behavioral intention to adopt AI tools?
4. Does AI Trust significantly predict adoption intention beyond UTAUT2 constructs?
5. What moderating factors influence the relationships between predictors and adoption intention?

### 1.4.2 Research Hypotheses

Based on UTAUT2 theory and AI-specific considerations, this study tests the following hypotheses:

**Core UTAUT2 Hypotheses (H1a–H1g)**:

- H1a–H1g: The seven UTAUT2 constructs (Performance Expectancy, Effort Expectancy, Social Influence, Facilitating Conditions, Hedonic Motivation, Price Value, and Habit) positively predict Behavioral Intention to adopt AI tools.

**AI Extension Hypothesis (H2)**:

- H2: AI Trust positively predicts Behavioral Intention beyond UTAUT2 constructs.

**Moderation Hypotheses (H3–H4)**:

- H3: Professional experience moderates the relationships between predictors and Behavioral Intention.
- H4: Population (Student vs. Professional) moderates the relationships between predictors and Behavioral Intention.

**Behavioral Validation Hypothesis (H5)**:

- H5: Behavioral Intention positively correlates with actual AI tool usage behavior.

Full hypothesis specifications with theoretical rationales are presented in Chapter 3 §3.3.2.

## 1.5 Theoretical and Practical Significance

### 1.5.1 Theoretical Significance

This study makes several contributions to technology acceptance scholarship:

**Framework Extension**: By empirically testing AI-specific constructs alongside established UTAUT2 predictors, this research extends technology acceptance theory to the AI domain. The theoretical extension responds to Venkatesh's [-@venkatesh2021adoption] call for AI-specific adoption research and addresses the unique characteristics of AI technologies that distinguish them from previous technology generations.

**Construct Validation**: The development of reliable measures for AI Trust provides validated operationalizations for future research. The psychometric validation process (including convergent validity, discriminant validity, and composite reliability assessment) ensures that these constructs meet scholarly standards for measurement quality.

**Cross-Population Invariance**: Testing measurement invariance across student and professional populations advances understanding of how adoption factors function across diverse workforce contexts. Configural invariance findings support the instrument's utility for comparative research across population segments.

**Moderation Discovery**: Identification of experience as a moderating factor on hedonic motivation pathways contributes novel insights to the technology acceptance literature, suggesting that adoption mechanisms may differ based on user characteristics in ways not previously documented.

### 1.5.2 Practical Significance

Beyond theoretical contributions, this research establishes foundations for future organizational applications:

**Validated Diagnostic Instrument**: The validated 16-item AIRS provides researchers and organizations with a psychometrically sound tool for measuring AI adoption readiness constructs. Beyond measurement, the 8-factor structure enables diagnostic assessment: organizations can identify specific barriers (e.g., low trust, inadequate perceived value) and design targeted interventions. The instrument's brevity (approximately 5 minutes to complete) enables deployment at scale while maintaining measurement rigor.

**User Typology Discovery**: The four-segment user typology identified through cluster analysis (AI Enthusiasts [16%], Cautious Adopters [30%], Moderate Users [37%], and Anxious Avoiders [17%]) provides a framework for future intervention research. The typology offers testable hypotheses about differential treatment effects that warrant experimental validation.

**Adoption Driver Insights**: The finding that Price Value (β = .505) dominates adoption intention, rather than traditional performance messaging, suggests hypotheses for organizational AI communication strategies that warrant future experimental testing.

**Moderation Discovery**: The moderating effect of professional experience on hedonic motivation pathways indicates that adoption mechanisms may differ by experience level, a finding that suggests hypotheses for experience-tailored training approaches.

## 1.6 Scope and Delimitations

### 1.6.1 Scope

This study focuses on individual-level adoption of AI tools in professional and academic contexts. The research:

- **Examines** behavioral intention to adopt AI tools as the primary outcome variable, with actual tool usage as a behavioral validation criterion.
- **Encompasses** both students and employed professionals across multiple industries, providing cross-population generalizability testing.
- **Includes** common AI tools such as ChatGPT, Microsoft Copilot, and Google Gemini as the technology context.
- **Applies** established psychometric validation methodology including split-sample EFA/CFA, structural equation modeling, and measurement invariance testing.
- **Addresses** adoption predictors at the individual psychological level rather than organizational or technological levels.

### 1.6.2 Delimitations

The following boundaries define what this study does not address:

**Organizational Factors**: While organizational infrastructure undoubtedly influences AI adoption, this study focuses on individual-level psychological predictors rather than organizational readiness factors such as IT infrastructure, leadership support, or governance frameworks.

**Actual Behavior Prediction**: The primary outcome is behavioral intention rather than sustained behavioral change. While intention strongly correlates with self-reported usage (ρ = .69), the study does not track actual usage behavior over time.

**Specific AI Tool Comparison**: The study examines AI tool adoption generally rather than comparing adoption patterns across specific tools (e.g., ChatGPT vs. Copilot).

**Cultural Context**: Data collection occurred in a single national context (primarily United States respondents). Cross-cultural generalizability requires future investigation.

**Dropped Constructs**: Four initially proposed AI-specific constructs (Voluntariness, α = .406; Explainability, α = .582; Ethical Risk, α = .546; and AI Anxiety, α = .301) demonstrated inadequate reliability and were excluded from the validated model. These constructs remain theoretically important but require revised operationalization in future research.

### 1.6.3 Scope Limitation Rationale

This dissertation deliberately limits its scope to **scale validation** rather than extending into diagnostic application or intervention design. This scope limitation is grounded in both methodological rigor and research ethics considerations.

**Foundational Requirements**: Psychometric validation must precede diagnostic application. Before the AIRS can serve as an organizational diagnostic tool, the instrument must demonstrate adequate reliability (α > .70), structural validity (CFA fit indices), discriminant validity (HTMT < .85), and measurement invariance across target populations. This dissertation addresses these foundational requirements.

**Validation Sequence**: Applied psychometrics follows a validation sequence: scale development -> reliability testing -> structural validation -> invariance testing -> normative data collection -> diagnostic application [@devellis2021]. This study completes the first four stages. Diagnostic application requires additional stages (particularly normative data collection across organizational contexts) that exceed doctoral scope.

**Statistical Limitations**: Certain claims require stronger evidence than cross-sectional self-report data can provide. For example:

- **User typology actionability**: While cluster analysis identified four distinct user segments, intervention effectiveness cannot be established without experimental designs testing differential treatment effects.
- **Adoption-value linkage**: The relationship between individual adoption readiness and organizational AI outcomes requires longitudinal data linking AIRS scores to measurable business metrics.
- **Cut-score development**: Establishing diagnostic thresholds (e.g., "low readiness" vs. "high readiness") requires validation studies demonstrating predictive validity against criterion outcomes.

**Future Research Foundation**: By completing rigorous psychometric validation within appropriate scope, this dissertation provides a credible foundation for future research. The AIRS instrument can support subsequent studies examining diagnostic protocols, intervention effectiveness, and organizational applications, research that builds upon rather than overextends the current findings.

Appendix E outlines a research roadmap for extending this foundational work through scoring algorithms, diagnostic protocols, and intervention frameworks in future investigations.

## 1.7 Definition of Key Terms

| Term | Definition |
|------|------------|
| **UTAUT2** | Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology 2 (Venkatesh et al., 2012) |
| **AIRS** | AI Readiness Scale: the 16-item psychometric instrument developed and validated in this study, serving both as a research scale and organizational diagnostic tool |
| **AI Trust** | Confidence in AI systems' reliability, accuracy, and benevolence; a novel construct extending UTAUT2 for AI-specific adoption contexts |
| **Behavioral Intention** | An individual's stated intention to use AI tools in their professional or academic work |
| **Performance Expectancy** | The degree to which using AI tools is expected to enhance job performance |
| **Effort Expectancy** | The perceived ease of use associated with AI tools |
| **Social Influence** | The degree to which important others believe one should use AI tools |
| **Facilitating Conditions** | Perceptions of organizational and technical infrastructure supporting AI use |
| **Hedonic Motivation** | The fun or pleasure derived from using AI tools |
| **Price Value** | The cognitive trade-off between perceived benefits of AI tools and their monetary cost |
| **AI Anxiety** | Apprehension or fear associated with AI technology |
| **Measurement Invariance** | The extent to which a measurement instrument functions equivalently across different groups |

## 1.8 Summary and Dissertation Structure

This chapter has introduced the research problem, purpose, questions, and significance of this study examining AI adoption readiness in professional and academic contexts.

The dissertation is organized into six chapters:

**Chapter 1: Introduction** establishes the research context, problem statement, research questions, and significance of the study.

**Chapter 2: Literature Review** examines the evolution of technology acceptance models from TAM through UTAUT2, synthesizes AI-specific adoption research, and develops the conceptual framework for the study.

**Chapter 3: Research Methodology** describes the research design, sampling procedures, instrument development, and analytical strategy employed in the ten-phase validation approach.

**Chapter 4: Findings** presents the empirical results from exploratory factor analysis, confirmatory factor analysis, measurement invariance testing, structural equation modeling, and behavioral validation.

**Chapter 5: Analysis and Discussion** interprets the findings in relation to existing literature, discusses theoretical and practical implications, and addresses unexpected findings.

**Chapter 6: Conclusions, Implications, and Recommendations** summarizes the study's contributions, provides recommendations for practitioners and organizations, acknowledges limitations, and suggests directions for future research.

Commit message:

Chair feedback implemented: LaTeX table conversion + figure source attributions

thesis/chapters/01_introduction.md, after:

# Chapter 1: Introduction

## 1.1 Background and Context

Artificial intelligence (AI) has evolved from a specialist capability to a foundational driver of enterprise transformation. Between 2023 and 2025, organizations accelerated AI integration across functions and geographies, fueled by advances in large language models, cloud-based ecosystems, and rapid democratization through enterprise platforms such as Microsoft 365 Copilot and ChatGPT Enterprise.

According to McKinsey's *State of AI* series, AI adoption has accelerated dramatically: after hovering around 50 percent for years, adoption jumped to 72 percent in 2024 and reached 88 percent by late 2025 [@mckinseyStateAI2024; @mckinseyStateAI2025]. This growth represents a fundamental shift in how organizations approach technology. AI is no longer an experimental capability but an expected component of modern work.

Yet this growth in adoption has not translated proportionally into business impact. Boston Consulting Group reported that only 5 percent of companies achieve measurable business value from AI initiatives, while roughly 74 percent struggle to scale beyond proofs of concept [@bcgAIAdoption2024; @bcgAIAdoption2025]. McKinsey found that only about 6 percent of organizations qualify as "AI high performers," that is, those attributing meaningful EBIT impact to AI and reporting significant value, while most organizations remain in piloting rather than scaling phases [@mckinseyStateAI2025]. IBM's Global AI Adoption Index found that 37 percent of enterprises cite data complexity and quality as their top barrier to AI success [@ibm2023], while Capgemini research suggests that organizations embedding AI into redesigned workflows achieve substantially higher returns than those merely layering AI atop legacy processes [@capgemini2025].

These figures reveal a paradox: AI is nearly ubiquitous, yet most enterprises fail to realize sustained economic or operational returns. MIT Media Lab's NANDA initiative estimates that 90 to 95 percent of generative-AI pilots fail to scale or yield measurable profit-and-loss improvements [@mitMediaLab2025]. This persistent gap between adoption rates and value realization (termed the "adoption-value gap") represents both a significant business challenge and a research opportunity.

Understanding why individuals adopt or resist AI tools is essential for closing this gap. While organizational-level barriers such as data infrastructure, governance frameworks, and change management have received considerable attention in practitioner literature, individual-level adoption psychology remains underexplored in empirical research. Technology acceptance research offers theoretical frameworks for understanding these individual differences, yet existing instruments were developed for earlier technology generations and may not capture the unique characteristics of AI tools.

## 1.2 Statement of the Problem

Despite decades of technology acceptance research, organizations lack validated instruments for assessing individual-level AI adoption readiness. This gap creates three interconnected problems:

**Theoretical Gap**: The dominant technology acceptance framework, the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology 2 (UTAUT2), was developed and validated primarily on mobile and consumer technologies [@venkatesh2012consumer]. While UTAUT2 explains significant variance in technology adoption generally, AI tools present unique characteristics that may require theoretical extension. These include concerns about job displacement, questions of algorithmic transparency, and trust in autonomous decision-making systems. Venkatesh [-@venkatesh2021adoption] identified nine unique research challenges for AI adoption that existing frameworks do not fully address, calling for empirical investigation of AI-specific adoption factors.

**Measurement Gap**: Current AI adoption assessments in organizational practice rely largely on ad hoc surveys or general technology readiness measures. No psychometrically validated instrument exists specifically for measuring AI adoption readiness in professional and academic contexts. This measurement gap limits both research comparability and practical diagnostic utility.

**Practice Gap**: Organizations invest heavily in AI infrastructure and training but often lack the diagnostic tools to identify which employees are likely to adopt AI tools, which will resist, and why. Without valid measurement instruments, intervention strategies remain poorly targeted. The 90–95 percent pilot failure rate suggests that technology deployment without attention to individual adoption psychology produces limited returns [@mitMediaLab2025]. Industry research identifies skill gaps and governance challenges as primary barriers: Deloitte's State of Generative AI reports highlight insufficient AI expertise as a significant constraint [@deloitte2024genai], while Gartner identifies governance maturity as a primary differentiator between AI leaders and laggards [@gartner2025].

## 1.3 Purpose of the Study

The purpose of this study is to develop and validate the **AI Readiness Scale (AIRS)**: a psychometrically sound diagnostic instrument extending UTAUT2 for enterprise AI tool adoption. The AIRS serves dual purposes: as a research scale for investigating AI adoption phenomena and as a diagnostic tool enabling organizations to identify specific adoption barriers and design targeted interventions. Specifically, this research aims to:

1. **Develop** a theoretically grounded diagnostic instrument incorporating both established UTAUT2 constructs and AI-specific factors, particularly AI Trust, enabling identification of specific adoption barriers.

2. **Validate** the instrument through rigorous split-sample methodology, using exploratory factor analysis (EFA) on a development sample and confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) on an independent holdout sample.

3. **Test** structural relationships between adoption predictors and behavioral intention through structural equation modeling (SEM).

4. **Examine** measurement invariance across student and professional populations to establish the instrument's applicability across diverse workforce contexts.

5. **Identify** moderating factors (including professional experience and AI usage frequency) that influence adoption pathways.

6. **Establish** a validated psychometric foundation for future research and organizational applications.

## 1.4 Research Questions and Hypotheses

### 1.4.1 Research Questions

**Primary Research Question:**
How can UTAUT2 be extended with AI-specific constructs to better predict behavioral intention to adopt AI tools in professional and academic contexts?

**Secondary Research Questions:**

1. What is the factor structure of an AI-specific adoption readiness instrument?
2. Does the instrument demonstrate measurement invariance across student and professional populations?
3. Which factors most strongly predict behavioral intention to adopt AI tools?
4. Does AI Trust significantly predict adoption intention beyond UTAUT2 constructs?
5. What moderating factors influence the relationships between predictors and adoption intention?

### 1.4.2 Research Hypotheses

Based on UTAUT2 theory and AI-specific considerations, this study tests the following hypotheses:

**Core UTAUT2 Hypotheses (H1a–H1g)**:

- H1a–H1g: The seven UTAUT2 constructs (Performance Expectancy, Effort Expectancy, Social Influence, Facilitating Conditions, Hedonic Motivation, Price Value, and Habit) positively predict Behavioral Intention to adopt AI tools.

**AI Extension Hypothesis (H2)**:

- H2: AI Trust positively predicts Behavioral Intention beyond UTAUT2 constructs.

**Moderation Hypotheses (H3–H4)**:

- H3: Professional experience moderates the relationships between predictors and Behavioral Intention.
- H4: Population (Student vs. Professional) moderates the relationships between predictors and Behavioral Intention.

**Behavioral Validation Hypothesis (H5)**:

- H5: Behavioral Intention positively correlates with actual AI tool usage behavior.

Full hypothesis specifications with theoretical rationales are presented in Chapter 3 §3.3.2.

## 1.5 Theoretical and Practical Significance

### 1.5.1 Theoretical Significance

This study makes several contributions to technology acceptance scholarship:

**Framework Extension**: By empirically testing AI-specific constructs alongside established UTAUT2 predictors, this research extends technology acceptance theory to the AI domain. The theoretical extension responds to Venkatesh's [-@venkatesh2021adoption] call for AI-specific adoption research and addresses the unique characteristics of AI technologies that distinguish them from previous technology generations.

**Construct Validation**: The development of reliable measures for AI Trust provides validated operationalizations for future research. The psychometric validation process (including convergent validity, discriminant validity, and composite reliability assessment) ensures that these constructs meet scholarly standards for measurement quality.

**Cross-Population Invariance**: Testing measurement invariance across student and professional populations advances understanding of how adoption factors function across diverse workforce contexts. Configural invariance findings support the instrument's utility for comparative research across population segments.

**Moderation Discovery**: Identification of experience as a moderating factor on hedonic motivation pathways contributes novel insights to the technology acceptance literature, suggesting that adoption mechanisms may differ based on user characteristics in ways not previously documented.

### 1.5.2 Practical Significance

Beyond theoretical contributions, this research establishes foundations for future organizational applications:

**Validated Diagnostic Instrument**: The validated 16-item AIRS provides researchers and organizations with a psychometrically sound tool for measuring AI adoption readiness constructs. Beyond measurement, the 8-factor structure enables diagnostic assessment: organizations can identify specific barriers (e.g., low trust, inadequate perceived value) and design targeted interventions. The instrument's brevity (approximately 5 minutes to complete) enables deployment at scale while maintaining measurement rigor.

**User Typology Discovery**: The four-segment user typology identified through cluster analysis (AI Enthusiasts [16%], Cautious Adopters [30%], Moderate Users [37%], and Anxious Avoiders [17%]) provides a framework for future intervention research. The typology offers testable hypotheses about differential treatment effects that warrant experimental validation.

**Adoption Driver Insights**: The finding that Price Value (β = .505) dominates adoption intention, rather than traditional performance messaging, suggests hypotheses for organizational AI communication strategies that warrant future experimental testing.

**Moderation Discovery**: The moderating effect of professional experience on hedonic motivation pathways indicates that adoption mechanisms may differ by experience level, a finding that suggests hypotheses for experience-tailored training approaches.

## 1.6 Scope and Delimitations

### 1.6.1 Scope

This study focuses on individual-level adoption of AI tools in professional and academic contexts. The research:

- **Examines** behavioral intention to adopt AI tools as the primary outcome variable, with actual tool usage as a behavioral validation criterion.
- **Encompasses** both students and employed professionals across multiple industries, providing cross-population generalizability testing.
- **Includes** common AI tools such as ChatGPT, Microsoft Copilot, and Google Gemini as the technology context.
- **Applies** established psychometric validation methodology including split-sample EFA/CFA, structural equation modeling, and measurement invariance testing.
- **Addresses** adoption predictors at the individual psychological level rather than organizational or technological levels.

### 1.6.2 Delimitations

The following boundaries define what this study does not address:

**Organizational Factors**: While organizational infrastructure undoubtedly influences AI adoption, this study focuses on individual-level psychological predictors rather than organizational readiness factors such as IT infrastructure, leadership support, or governance frameworks.

**Actual Behavior Prediction**: The primary outcome is behavioral intention rather than sustained behavioral change. While intention strongly correlates with self-reported usage (ρ = .69), the study does not track actual usage behavior over time.

**Specific AI Tool Comparison**: The study examines AI tool adoption generally rather than comparing adoption patterns across specific tools (e.g., ChatGPT vs. Copilot).

**Cultural Context**: Data collection occurred in a single national context (primarily United States respondents). Cross-cultural generalizability requires future investigation.

**Dropped Constructs**: Four initially proposed AI-specific constructs (Voluntariness, α = .406; Explainability, α = .582; Ethical Risk, α = .546; and AI Anxiety, α = .301) demonstrated inadequate reliability and were excluded from the validated model. These constructs remain theoretically important but require revised operationalization in future research.

### 1.6.3 Scope Limitation Rationale

This dissertation deliberately limits its scope to **scale validation** rather than extending into diagnostic application or intervention design. This scope limitation is grounded in both methodological rigor and research ethics considerations.

**Foundational Requirements**: Psychometric validation must precede diagnostic application. Before the AIRS can serve as an organizational diagnostic tool, the instrument must demonstrate adequate reliability (α > .70), structural validity (CFA fit indices), discriminant validity (HTMT < .85), and measurement invariance across target populations. This dissertation addresses these foundational requirements.

**Validation Sequence**: Applied psychometrics follows a validation sequence: scale development -> reliability testing -> structural validation -> invariance testing -> normative data collection -> diagnostic application [@devellis2021]. This study completes the first four stages. Diagnostic application requires additional stages (particularly normative data collection across organizational contexts) that exceed doctoral scope.

**Statistical Limitations**: Certain claims require stronger evidence than cross-sectional self-report data can provide. For example:

- **User typology actionability**: While cluster analysis identified four distinct user segments, intervention effectiveness cannot be established without experimental designs testing differential treatment effects.
- **Adoption-value linkage**: The relationship between individual adoption readiness and organizational AI outcomes requires longitudinal data linking AIRS scores to measurable business metrics.
- **Cut-score development**: Establishing diagnostic thresholds (e.g., "low readiness" vs. "high readiness") requires validation studies demonstrating predictive validity against criterion outcomes.

**Future Research Foundation**: By completing rigorous psychometric validation within appropriate scope, this dissertation provides a credible foundation for future research. The AIRS instrument can support subsequent studies examining diagnostic protocols, intervention effectiveness, and organizational applications, research that builds upon rather than overextends the current findings.

Appendix E outlines a research roadmap for extending this foundational work through scoring algorithms, diagnostic protocols, and intervention frameworks in future investigations.

## 1.7 Definition of Key Terms

```{=latex}
\begin{table}[H]
\centering
\caption{Table 1.1: Key Terms and Definitions}
\begin{tabular}{@{}>{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{0.25\textwidth}>{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{0.70\textwidth}@{}}
\toprule
\textbf{Term} & \textbf{Definition} \\
\midrule
\textbf{UTAUT2} & Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology 2 (Venkatesh et al., 2012) \\
\textbf{AIRS} & AI Readiness Scale: the 16-item psychometric instrument developed and validated in this study, serving both as a research scale and organizational diagnostic tool \\
\textbf{AI Trust} & Confidence in AI systems' reliability, accuracy, and benevolence; a novel construct extending UTAUT2 for AI-specific adoption contexts \\
\textbf{Behavioral Intention} & An individual's stated intention to use AI tools in their professional or academic work \\
\textbf{Performance Expectancy} & The degree to which using AI tools is expected to enhance job performance \\
\textbf{Effort Expectancy} & The perceived ease of use associated with AI tools \\
\textbf{Social Influence} & The degree to which important others believe one should use AI tools \\
\textbf{Facilitating Conditions} & Perceptions of organizational and technical infrastructure supporting AI use \\
\textbf{Hedonic Motivation} & The fun or pleasure derived from using AI tools \\
\textbf{Price Value} & The cognitive trade-off between perceived benefits of AI tools and their monetary cost \\
\textbf{AI Anxiety} & Apprehension or fear associated with AI technology \\
\textbf{Measurement Invariance} & The extent to which a measurement instrument functions equivalently across different groups \\
\bottomrule
\end{tabular}

\vspace{0.5em}
\footnotesize\textit{Source: Compiled by Author}
\end{table}
```

## 1.8 Summary and Dissertation Structure

This chapter has introduced the research problem, purpose, questions, and significance of this study examining AI adoption readiness in professional and academic contexts.

The dissertation is organized into six chapters:

**Chapter 1: Introduction** establishes the research context, problem statement, research questions, and significance of the study.

**Chapter 2: Literature Review** examines the evolution of technology acceptance models from TAM through UTAUT2, synthesizes AI-specific adoption research, and develops the conceptual framework for the study.

**Chapter 3: Research Methodology** describes the research design, sampling procedures, instrument development, and analytical strategy employed in the ten-phase validation approach.

**Chapter 4: Findings** presents the empirical results from exploratory factor analysis, confirmatory factor analysis, measurement invariance testing, structural equation modeling, and behavioral validation.

**Chapter 5: Analysis and Discussion** interprets the findings in relation to existing literature, discusses theoretical and practical implications, and addresses unexpected findings.

**Chapter 6: Conclusions, Implications, and Recommendations** summarizes the study's contributions, provides recommendations for practitioners and organizations, acknowledges limitations, and suggests directions for future research.
